Windows 10
On July 29, 2015, Microsoft launched Windows 10 along with a free upgrade offer available in 190 countries for the life of the system.  At this time the free upgrade offer has expired (yes, even the assistive technology loophole) and you will need to purchase it if you wish to upgrade your existing Windows 7 or 8.1 system.  With Windows 10 Microsoft now has a kernel that is shared across multiple form factors and shares a common codebase and security updates (Desktop, Laptop, Tablet, Mobile, IoT and now Server 2016). 

Mainstream lifecycle support lasts until October 2020 with extended support until October 2025.

Features

Windows 10 feature emulator.  

Specifications

CPU - 1 GHz or faster

Ram - 1 GB for 32bit, 2 GB for 64bit

Hard disk - 16 GB for 32 bit, 20 GB for 64 bit

Graphics card, DirectX 9 or later with WDDM 1.0 driver

Display 800x600

Additional requirements to use certain features

Cortana, Speech recognition, Windows Hello, etc.

Windows 10 Full Localization Languages

You can compare the features of the four available editions here.  (Home, Pro, Enterprise and Education)

Windows 10 update history and an unofficial Windows 10 changelog.

Block automatic driver updates

"Spying" allegations

The so-called "Golden Key" issue has been widely misunderstood by blogs and pundits. Read here and here for less biased, more accurate explanations. No actual PKI keys have leaked; a signed policy file was found and re-purposed to disable secure boot protections. This article explains that any software with an update system is susceptible to the same type of issue.

Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL)

Feedback

If you want a change or different behavior, make sure you use the Feedback Hub to add or up vote an idea.

How Windows Insider Feedback Influences Windows 10 Development

Version/Install/Upgrade/Activation Stuff

Windows 10 is designed to be continuously updated through major releases.

Released Major Versions (winver to check your build)

July 2015 - Original          - OS Build 10240.x

Nov 2015 - Version 1511 - OS Build 10586.x

Aug 2016 - Version 1607 - OS Build 14393.x    - also known as the AU release.

The Windows 10 Anniversary Update (version 1607) is being rolled out to Windows 10 PCs across the world in phases starting with newer machines first. It will roll out automatically to you through Windows Update if you’ve chosen to have updates installed automatically on your device. If you’re using a Windows 10 PC at work, you will need to check with your IT administrator for details on your organization’s specific plans to update.

If you want to force your system to upgrade now, go to this link. 

We regularly update this page with proper and legit links to all downloadable OS install media.

Installing via the Media Creation Tool (MCT)

Activation in Windows 10

Why can't I activate Windows 10?

Get help with activation errors

Common errors and how to fix them

Getting Rid of Windows.old

Microsoft's Upgrade help page with many error messages and causes

How much does Windows 10/Pro/Upgrade cost?

We are not a sales channel and cost may be different in your country.  Please check the Microsoft Store, Amazon, Newegg, or the search engine of your choice

But I am in 'country X and I 'need' it and they don't sell it here........ NO.  We are still NOT a sales channel.

Support / Information links

Launch site

Windows 10 FAQ - Most of the questions answered around license and reinstall

Windows 10 help & how-to

Getting Started with Windows 10

Microsoft's Windows 10 How To page

Microsoft's Windows privacy policy

Windows 10 Feedback, diagnostics, and privacy: FAQ

Yes, we've seen the anonymous fearmonger images.  Our position is that MS are being clear and verbose about industry standard practices, they're providing more options than anyone else in the biz, and this is a good thing.  Read the policy, make informed decisions.  

If after reading the policy you still have qualms, choose another OS. No one has a gun to your head.

We don't care to hear any more ranting on the subject. If you want an informed, intelligent debate, bring your facts and your points politely. See our debate guidelines.

What Windows 10's "Privacy Nightmare" Settings Actually Do

Ars Technica evaluates the situation.

All you need to know about privacy settings in Windows 10 and Microsoft Edge

Windows 10: should privacy problems worry me?

Technet deep dive on telemetry

Blocking specific updates on Win10: KB3073930

Use the new CompactOS feature to reduce Win10 disk space requirements: Technet article, WindowsCentral article.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Windows 10 servicing options for updates and upgrades

With Windows 10 Microsoft substantially changes the update/support model for patching.  Microsoft's motivation for this seems to stem from two sources;

Avoid Windows 7 getting into a situation like Windows XP.

Avoid news articles about botnets created through vectors patched months to years ago where users failed to apply patches or disabled windows update.

With Windows 10, Microsoft will continuously add features and functionality throughout the life of a service branch.  With Windows 10 there will be three 'servicing options'.  Current Branch (CB), Current Branch for Business (CBB) and Long-Term Servicing Branch (LTSB).  This continuous update model Microsoft describes as Windows as a Service where product cycles are measured in months instead of years and released sooner rather then later.  This also adds Windows Insiders to be able to publically test and provide feedback on these builds and features as Microsoft releases them through a Fast or Slow ring.

For the general public, there will be two types of updates.  

Feature upgrades that install the latest new features, experiences, and capabilities on devices that are already running Windows 10. Because feature upgrades contain an entire copy of Windows, they are also what customers use to install Windows 10 on existing devices running Windows 7 or Windows 8.1, and on new devices where no operating system is installed.

Servicing updates that focus on the installation of security fixes and other important updates. 

Feature upgrades are announced for a two to three times a year release while Servicing updates are as needed for security or bug fixes.

Support scenarios

Current Branch - (Home, Pro, Education, Enterprise) - supported for a minimum of four months for servicing updates, after which you may be required to update to a Feature upgrade.  The goal is to deploy new features as soon as possible. 

Current Branch for Business - (Pro, Education, Enterprise) - Feature upgrades will be available after around 4 months from initial publication for Current Branch users.  Supported for approximately 8 months.  This is to provide businesses additional time to test new feature upgrades before deployment.  NOTE: YOU will need WSUS, SCCM or some other patch deployment method to control/approve patches/feature upgrades.

Long-Term Servicing Branch - (Enterprise LTSB) - This is a special deployment for low change configurations and will only receive servicing updates.  As it is Enterprise only, it seems to require an SA agreement with Microsoft to implement and is not available to consumers.

For more pictures and details see this TechNet article.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Other interesting links

Full list of shortcut keys

Windows Central on install and clean reinstall

ArsTechnica article on a reinstall

67 million systems upgraded in 2 and a half days

Windows 10 forced automatic updates are a good idea

Windows 10 forced updates: Don't Panic

Faster booting, smaller footprint make Windows 10 an easy upgrade for old PCs

MS Edge building a safer browser

How Microsoft built, and is still building, Windows 10

Top 20 reasons why it's a good choice to upgrade to Windows 10

 
