Software Recommendations
We often get asked what's the "best" software for some specific purpose. Here's the general consensus among channel operators.

But in the end, "best" is a highly personal thing. Our recommendations reflect our personal choices in non-professional, at-home situations. We encourage everyone to experiment and find their own personal "best". All of these recommendations come at no cost to home users, unless noted.

Antivirus/antimalware

If you're running Windows 8, Windows Defender is builtin. 

For XP, Vista, and Win7, we recommend Microsoft Security Essentials (MSE). It was renamed to Windows Defender in Win8.

MSE/Defender regularly get good scores on third party detection tests, and rarely if ever give false alarms. And, we think it's important that once configured, they quietly keep themselves updated, not bothering you until your attention is actually needed. We consider them to be great protection for anyone who is already following basic security practices.

Keeping Software Up To Date

We recommend running Secunia PSI from time to time, to make sure all of your software (not just Windows) is as secure and up-to-date as possible.

Backup Software

Local backups

Windows has built-in backup abilities. See our pages on Win7 and Win8 backup.

Easus Todo Backup is well regarded, but costs $29.

Easus does link a free version of their product here, but they seem to be de-emphasising it. We're not sure how long this link will last.

Cloud backups

Some of us keep all of our important personal data in OneDrive which easily syncs a local folder to Microsoft servers and any other PCs you happen to have. The first 15GB are free; you can add storage for a yearly fee.

There are other 3rd party solutions.  Use something to protect your data. 

Web Browser

Internet Explorer, Google Chrome, Firefox, Opera ... web browser choice is often hotly contested. We say: try them all. Make your own choice.

Password Manager

LastPass

Some people worry about the cloud storage aspect of LastPass (though network access is not required to retrieve passwords). For these people, we recommend KeePass.

PDF Viewing

Win8 includes the Metro Reader app, which is fine for simple PDF viewing.

For XP, Vista, and Win7, we recommend Foxit Reader. 

Mindful of Adobe's epic security difficulties over the last decade, we suggest you avoid Adobe Reader.

Text Editor

Notepad++ is very popular. But have a look at EditPad Lite.

Image Editing

Paint.Net

Disk/partition Imaging

Macrium Reflect

Disk space visualization

Gerlach's Scanner

ISO image mounting

Win8 has this functionality built in

Microsoft Virtual CD-ROM Control Panel works for Windows 7 and Vista

For XP, Vista, and Win7 we recommend Slysoft's Virtual CloneDrive. It installs without hassle, needing no reboots or additional drivers. It works simply and well.

ISO image recording/creation

Alex Feinman's ISO Recorder.

UltraISO, if you need more capabilities than ISORecorder

SSH Daemon

FreeSSHD

SSH/telnet Client

PuTTY or Kitty

Scripting

PowerShell. It's native to Windows Vista, 7 and 8. It can be installed to prior versions of Windows.  FOr more information see Windows PowerShell Survival Guide and #powershell on freenode.

For scripting of GUI actions and macros, AutoHotKey.

Audio/Video

VLC is a one-stop shop for all your video and audio watching and listening needs. It includes all the codecs most people will ever need.

For simple video editing, Windows Live Movie Maker is free and easily acquired.

For screencasting, we recommend Screencast-o-Matic.

Remote Support

TeamViewer

System/Registry Cleanup

We don't feel that "registry cleaning" serves any real purpose. But a lot of people like CCleaner for general system cleanup of temp files, recycle bin, web history, etc. It does include a registry cleaner, if you are so inclined.

IRC Client

HexChat

KVIrc

Create a Windows Flash USB drive on Linux from ISO

WinUSB - You will need to follow directions as ##windows does not support Linux.

WoeUSB - You will need to follow directions as ##windows does not support Linux.
